---
layout: post
title: "HOWTO: Manage GTD Tasks with Vim"
excerpt: ""
categories: [technical tips]
comments: true
---

There are existing terminal GTD tools such as OrgMode.
However, they are *too versatile* and I want a simplistic version with Vim.
My goal could be decomposed into several aspects.
1. Hotkeys to quickly collect tasks information in distributed files and prompt a digest.
2. Tasks are classified with different types: urgent, main, habit, and random.
3. Hotkeys to quickly tag a task item with the desired type.

Since I could not find any existing plugins that suit exactly my need, I decided to make it myself.
To achieve goal 1, one could simply leverage `vimgrep` to search the unique meta data of the task and `noremap` to attach preferred key bindings to the operation.

{% highlight Vimscript %}
noremap <Leader>ta :vimgrep /TTT_/j ~/my-emacs/vimwiki/**/*<CR>:cw<CR>
noremap <Leader>tu :vimgrep /TTT_URGENT/j ~/my-emacs/vimwiki/**/*<CR>:cw<CR>
noremap <Leader>tm :vimgrep /TTT_MAIN/j ~/my-emacs/vimwiki/**/*<CR>:cw<CR>
noremap <Leader>th :vimgrep /TTT_HABIT/j ~/my-emacs/vimwiki/**/*<CR>:cw<CR>
noremap <Leader>tr :vimgrep /TTT_RANDOM/j ~/my-emacs/vimwiki/**/*<CR>:cw<CR>
{% endhighlight %}

These commands will allow me to quickly track the tasks of different categories with a inforwindow. (j is to forbid jumping to the first occurence and :cw is to directly jump to the quickfix window)

Simlilarly, one could add the following lines to `.vimrc` to support instant tagging.

{% highlight Vimscript %}
noremap <Leader>mu <Esc>i\ TTT_URGENT 
noremap <Leader>mm <Esc>i\ TTT_MAIN 
noremap <Leader>mr <Esc>i\ TTT_RANDOM 
noremap <Leader>mh <Esc>i\ TTT_HABIT 
{% endhighlight %}

Now, inside Vim editor, one could just type the hotkeys to overview the target type of tasks. `:cclose` will clost the quickfix window without the need of navigation. `:cn` and `:cp` will navigate automatically to the next/previous task.


PS: I have abandoned Vim as the time/task management tool. It is much more convenient to use the Mac Calendar!
{: .notice}

